Add article summaries here and I can add them to the Jupyter Notebook!

https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/135/2/711/5687353 : Race and Economic Opportunity in the United States: an Intergenerational Perspective

Summary: This article studies the sources of racial income disparities in the United States by using anonymized longitudinal data covering nearly the entire US population from 1989 to 2015 to examine the black-white income gap. This article focuses on black and white men, because they found no differences in income between black and white women. Using de-identified data from censuses linked to data from income tax return, a four-part analysis was conducted. The study first characterized intergenerational gaps by race, measured children’s incomes as their mean household income when they were in their mid thirties, measured parents’ income as mean household income between 1994 and 2000, and finally measured intergenerational mobility using a rank specification. 

Findings: This analysis found that the largest racial income gap is between black and white people. This gap is perpetuated by segregation, proposing that black and white people examined in this study may have different outcomes because they tend to live in different neighborhoods. While honing in on the large gap between black and white Americans, this study also found nuance among a variety of racial groups. Notably, black and American Indian children have lower rates of upward mobility and higher rates of downward mobility than white children, while hispanic children have relatively high rates of upward mobility and are moving up in the income distribution across generations. This study concluded that a program that closes the gap in opportunity between black and white children at a parental income level, perhaps in the form of a trust, could eliminate much of the income gap in as little as two generations. 

https://read.dukeupress.edu/demography/article/56/3/999/167998/Race-Matters-Income-Shares-Income-Inequality-and : Race Matters: Income Shares, Income Inequality, and Income Mobility for All U.S. Races | Demography | Duke University Press 

Summary: This article uses unique linked data to conduct an analysis of income inequality and mobility by race and ethnicity. Researchers used data that include an administrative source of income for the population of US income tax filers over 15 years, and the race and ethnicity of each observation. Using this data helped the researchers overcome usual limitations because the Internal Revenue Service tax data was linked at the person level to Census Bureau data on rice and hispanic origin. The study was mainly motivated by the knowledge that race matters for economic and social outcomes, and that there are stark disparities in everything from wage to health outcomes across racial groups in the United States. Furthermore, a recent rise in income inequality has been largely unexplored, and this article aims to explain it along racial and ethnic lines.

Findings: The main finding of this analysis was the uncovering of a rigid income structure, with white and Asian people positioned at the top, and black people, American Indians, and Hispanics confined to the bottom. Whites tend to have a disproportionately large share of income in top quantiles, and all other races occupy a disproportionately large share of the income distribution in the bottom 10% and 1% of the whole income distribution. An interesting finding of this article was a novel rate of income growth at the 90th percentile of the income distribution, which exceeds that at the 50th percentile for all racial and ethnic groups. This means that the top part of the income distribution is diverging from the rest at a fast rate, and the middle income part of the distribution is diverging from the bottom. This growth trend is most pronounced among white people. However, income mobility decreased for all racial and ethnic groups between 2000 and 2014, contributing to a rigid distribution of income among races. 

https://www.jstor.org/stable/48563035?searchText=&searchUri=&ab_segments=&searchKey=&refreqid=fastly-default%3A64051b3b2a29ac23d1814473e80c2e02 : What’s Policy Got to Do with It? Race, Gender, and Economic Inequality in the United States 

Summary: This article was based on the knowledge that economic inequality is both racialized and gendered, and that public policy bears great weight in its relation to racial inequalities in economic positions among women. The study focused on women because, “Comparisons to men across and within racial groups are often highlighted over and above differences between women. By focusing on comparisons among women, we show that across most metrics of economic well-being, black and latina women are considerably disadvantaged.” The analysis aims to investigate whether and how social and economic policies differentially shape women’s economic positioning across racial and ethnic groups. The contributors to this article achieve this analysis by charting disparities between white women and women of color across economic indicators. They begin by defining four dimensions of economic status for black, white, and latina women: educational attainment, employment status, earnings, and poverty. They then used these dimensions to construct an economic index with data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population Survey. 

Findings: This examination of public policy in relation to economic inequality uncovered that there is significant disparity in the relationship between economic policy and the economic status of women across racial and ethnic groups. A major finding from the earnings section of the index was that white women’s median weekly earnings were $814, compared with $673 for black women and $618 for latina women, taken from data from 2017. The central argument of this article derived from those findings is that women’s economic positioning and the policies that shape it are highly differentiated across racial and ethnic groups. 

